Good day. I'm Norman Wildberger. Today we're
going to introduce a new type of mathematical
object called a fraction, and defining a fraction
precisely is a significant challenge. There are
many different points of view that one could
possibly take. We're going to approach things
from a foundational point of view, meaning
we're interested in something which has very
few prerequisites and is just based on what we've
done so far, starting from natural numbers. Let's
introduce the idea that a mathematical object
has a certain type. So far, we only have natural
numbers, and they are of type N, standing for
natural number. Here's a summary of the operations
that we have so far that are inputting numbers
or pairs of numbers and outputting numbers.
We want to introduce new objects called fractions,
like 2/3 or this one here, and we want to do this
for a number of reasons. First of all, we
want to be able to do arithmetic smoothly,
so when we have 24/6 * 15/5, we know we can
rewrite that as 24 * 15 / 6 * 5. The way we
are doing arithmetic suggests that we should be
able to swap these around, replace it with 5 * 6,
and then rewrite this as 24 / 5 * 15 / 6. However,
currently, these are not well-defined operations.
We cannot currently divide 24 by 5 nor 15 by 6, so
currently, this kind of operation is not defined.
There are various approaches to fractions. One
of them is to think of a fraction as a part of
a whole. So if we represent one not just with a
little stick but let's say a square or possibly
a circle, then we would represent two as a pair
of squares or a pair of circles, and then it's
natural to think of 2/3 as representing a part
of one, in this case, the red part. That's one
way of thinking about what a fraction like 2/3
means. Another way of thinking about it is in
terms of the measure of a segment. If we think
of one as representing a segment like this,
then something like three will be represented
by a longer segment like that, and then it's
natural to think about a shorter segment, perhaps
like that one, as being a representation of what
2/3 means. Similarly, if we look at this longer
segment and divide it by two, then we get the
fraction 3/2. So that's a derivation of what
fractions are, connecting it with geometry.
Another way of thinking about fractions is
as an operation. So we think of 2/3 as being
an operation that allows us to take 2/3 of
something. Here's a collection of things;
2/3 of this collection is this collection. So
it's an operator that acts on something to give
you something else. Another way of thinking about
it is as a ratio or a proportion. For example,
2/3 can be thought of as the ratio or
proportion 2 to 3, and we can imagine
that by comparing two objects, the relative
sizes of those two objects might be 2 to 3.
There are various possible ways of thinking
about fractions, and each one of them has
some usefulness and validity and can be used
as a basis for teaching young people. However,
when we do mathematics, we want to set things
up in such a way as not to require a prior
understanding of geometry. We want something that
only depends on what we've already done before,
and so we're going to use a slightly different
way of thinking about what a fraction is.
Here is our main definition: a fraction is
an ordered pair (M, N) of natural numbers.
So it's just two natural numbers, one followed
by the other, an ordered pair, and we also write
this ordered pair in the form m/n. That's what a
fraction is—a mathematical definition. And there's
an important notion of equality that occurs with
fractions. If we have two fractions, m/n and k/l,
then these two fractions are declared to
be equal precisely when m * l = n * k. So,
for example, 2/3 = 6/9 because 2 * 9 is equal to
3 * 6, and both of those are equal to 4/6 and to
many other ones. That's a definition of fraction
that only depends on our prior understanding of
what a natural number is—a fraction is just a
pair of natural numbers which we write as m/n.
Now there's a possible confusion here with our
earlier notation, and let's make sure we get
this straight. Right now, let's say we have 15/5
with this slanted line. That represents for us a
fraction, and it's a new type of mathematical
object which we'll call F, short for fraction.
15/5 with a horizontal line like that represents a
division; that is a number still in the type num.
So from now on, we're going to distinguish between
a horizontal line, which means division of one
natural number by another, and the slanted
line, which represents a fraction for us.
Well, now that we have fractions, we
can naturally ask how we are going to do
arithmetic with them. That's what we're
going to talk about in the next video.
I hope you'll join me. I'm Norman
Wildberger. Thanks for listening.